Thank you for downloading version 0.8 of ITVal, an iptables configuration
verification and analysis tool.  This release of ITVal adds several important
new features and fixes some minor bugs in topology handling and parsing.

IMPORTANT NOTE: Version 0.8 breaks compatability with previous versions of the
tool!  Query files created for versions 0.7 and lower may not work with this
version or may generate unexpected results.  See below for more details.

Version 0.7 added support for address ranges both in queries and in
group/service definitions and made the output of the "CLASSES" query more
manageable.

Version 0.6 included many bug fixes and some features from version 0.5 (which
was not released) including some preliminary code for a GUI.

Version 0.5 introduced a new type of query called "CLASSES" that partitions the
set of all IP addresses into groups according to how the firewall treats each
host with that address.  It also introduced a few minor bugfixes.  

What's new in 0.8?
------------------
New query primitives: 

The semantics of the query have changed so that the query condition is no
longer implicitly intersected with the set of accepted packets.  Instead, ITVal
provides two new query primitives, "ACCEPTED" and "DROPPED", which represent
the set of ACCEPTED and DROPPED packets, respectively.  This allows the user to
create queries such as "QUERY SADDY FROM 192.168.2.* AND (ACCEPTED FORWARD OR
ACCEPTED INPUT)" that test for acceptance from multiple built-in chains.

As a consequence of this change, queries no longer take an "input_chain"
argument.  Instead, this argument should be passed to the "ACCEPTED" or
"DROPPED" keyword.  

This change BREAKS COMPATABILITY with old query files.  To convert old files to
the new syntax, replace the "input_chain" parameter from each query with an
"AND ACCEPTED <input_chain>" at the end of the query.  For instance:

QUERY SADDY INPUT FROM 192.168.2.* AND IN NEW;

would become:

QUERY SADDY (FROM 192.168.2.* AND IN NEW) AND ACCEPTED INPUT;

Assertion statements:

Version 0.8 adds support for "assertions".  Assertions are similar to queries,
but return a true or false value.  They are particularly useful for expressing
desired properties of the firewall policy.  Although assertion statements
currently provide similar functionality to queries, they are very extensible.
Future versions of ITVal will provide detailed analysis of why an assertion
failed or held true -- information which can make it much easier to fix
problems in the rule set.

What is not provided in release 0.8?
------------------------------------
1.  Support for non-iptables filters.

ITVal does not filters for platforms other than Linux. Because maintaining
parsers for other languages is costly and time-consuming, it is unlikely
that I will be adding support for other platforms.  However, I do intend
to create an API for writing language modules, so if you want to see
your platform supported, you will have the tools to add support for that
language.

2.  Support for application level filtering.

ITVal is designed to work only with packet-filters.  While, in theory,
ITVal could be extended to other uses, such as e-mail filtering, to do
so would require a significant overhaul of the internal design.

3.  A fancy graphical front-end.

Work on the GUI continues slowly as we decide what to provide through the
interface and refactor the code to make it more amenable to graphical
manipulation.

What is coming in future versions of ITVal?
-------------------------------------------
1.  Witnesses and Counter-examples (for Assertions)
When an assertion fails, ITVal will optionally generate an example packet that
violates the assertion.  When an assertion succeeds, ITVal will generate a
packet that honors the assertion.

2.  Guided repair
ITVal will generate a list of suggested changes to the rule set that satisfy
all the assertions in a query file.

3.  Translations
Aleksandr Shubnik has volunteered to provide Russian translations for ITVal.  
Hopefully, others will join the team to provide translations in other languages.

4.  Packages for popular distributions
Alex has also volunteered to help with an RPM package for ITVal.  Also in 
progress is an ebuild for Gentoo portage.

5.  A Graphical Front-End
Yes, really!  I am leaning now toward a QT-based interface that will allow the
user to manipulate queries in a text-editing environment and then check them in
real time against the rule set.  The old, klugy, python/TK attempt was not
very portable and introduced a bunch of problems with paths.
